On its own, gamma-P-G-A is a floppy tangle of chains that
all carry a negative charge — so they repel and slide
past each other. How do you turn that into a solid?
Calcium is the answer. Each calcium ion carries two positive charges
— so it can grab a negative site on one chain
and a negative site on the next, at the same time.
Each ion clamps two chains together into a bridge.
How many bridges form? A binding curve tells us: as calcium rises, more
sites get clamped, until the chains are saturated and it levels off.
And bridge count is what sets stiffness. More clamps means a denser
network — and a denser network is a stiffer, stronger gel.
So the whole story is: count the calcium clamps, and that
number becomes the stiffness the crust brings to the sand.